Iceberg Blog (#8861)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/blog/2026-03-26-iceberg-catalogs.md

---
title: "The Catalog Linked Database Diaries: On Freshness and Writes"
description: "Learn about catalog linked databases with Apache Iceberg."
slug: catalog-linked-databases
authors: [anna_lee, mila_page]
tags: [iceberg, catalogs]
hide_table_of_contents: false
date: 2026-03-26
is_featured: true
---

## The Catalog Linked Database Diaries: On Freshness and Writes

Last November, at dbt Summit, Jeremy introduced dbt’s multi-platform Iceberg capabilities. 

<div style={{ display: 'flex', justifyContent: 'center', }}>
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/bRJJkeJkUsE?si=mQTD3jUNpPqvwrJb" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>
</div>

> With them, Snowflake can seamlessly query and write Iceberg tables to catalogs in other platforms. We wanted to push those claims to their limit and did so by exploring the interconnectivity of Databricks Unity Catalog and Snowflake.

Reviewer: I really dislike this 'with them' lead in. something about it is odd. Maybe something simpler like "Snowflake can now"

> With them, Snowflake can seamlessly query and write Iceberg tables to catalogs in other platforms. We wanted to push those claims to their limit and did so by exploring the interconnectivity of Databricks Unity Catalog and Snowflake.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What intrigued us most was the promised interconnectivity of Databricks Unity Catalog and Snowflake catalog-linked databases.
```

> AI’s all the rage, but another little revolution is taking shape: Teams are breaking their data storage out of vendor-specific platforms. The Iceberg table format and Iceberg REST catalogs are the emerging standards powering that flexibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI’s all the rage, but another little revolution is taking shape: Teams are breaking their data storage out of vendor-specific platforms. For months, we have been chatting with users excited to adopt Iceberg as a core pillar of their data architecture. The Iceberg table format and Iceberg REST catalogs are the emerging standards powering that flexibility. 
```

> We have been chatting for months with users excited to adopt Iceberg as a core pillar of their data architecture. For dbt’s part, we see two opportunities to power this little revolution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For dbt’s part, this shows up in two concrete use cases:
```

or something similar

## Our testing regimen

Based on our telemetry of real-world dbt projects, we see that large projects number in the hundreds of models. Some number in the thousands. For the purposes of our testing, we make the riskiest assumption that *every single model* would be materialized as an Iceberg table. This is our upper bound. (It’s rare behavior in dbt projects adopting Iceberg, but a team could have legitimate reasons for choosing this.)

At these scales, catalog behavior, metadata operations, and refresh mechanics really start to matter. We observed latencies and frictions in the hundreds, but for science, we pushed this to its extreme. We loaded 500k tables into one database and tested write performance, synchronization promises, etc.

1. **Reading at scale:** What’s the overhead when Snowflake reads tables owned elsewhere?
2. **Writing at scale:** How does performance change when you’re creating/updating lots of tables and querying big sums of metadata?
3. **Freshness under change:** When one platform updates data, how reliably and quickly does the other see it?

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

We've published our full testing regimen and detailed findings, for anyone who wants to take a deeper look: https://github.com/dbt-labs/snow-dbx-iceberg-benchmark

```

## Reads at scale: Good performance, but only after platforms sync {#reads-at-scale}

Using TPC-H queries over large benchmarking datasets, we found that once data is visible and up to date, querying those Iceberg tables from Snowflake is as fast as you’d want in any reasonable analytics workflow. Databricks querying the same data from the owning side is speedy too.

> The catch is that “read performance” is really only half the story. In practice, what users experience is not “how fast is this query,” but “am I even querying the latest thing?” When freshness slips, CLDs stop feeling like a pipe and start feeling like waiting for a package held up in customs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The catch is that “read performance” is really only half the story. In practice, what users experience is not “how fast is this query,” but “am I even querying fresh data?” When freshness slips, CLDs stop feeling like a pipe and start feeling like waiting for a package held up in customs.
```

## Writes and change at scale: The compute bottleneck {#writes-and-changes-at-scale}

> When Snowflake is the one making lots of changes (creating tables, updating metadata, producing many Iceberg commits), the limiting factor quickly becomes the write path. In a dbt-shaped workload—many small/medium table operations rather than one giant append—this can make runs slow and sometimes fragile under contention. This can lead to outright failures that claim your table no longer exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Snowflake is the one making lots of changes (creating tables, updating metadata, producing many Iceberg commits), the job runs the query against the upstream Databricks objects. A query might take twice as long, but the data is synchronized across both platforms. Write throughput becomes the limiting factor. In a dbt-shaped workload—many small/medium table operations rather than one giant append—this can make runs slow and sometimes fragile under contention. This can lead to outright failures claiming your table no longer exists.
```

> When Databricks is making changes, writes are the same as ordinary Databricks Iceberg writes. Snowflake’s ability to reflect those changes is unpredictable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, when Databricks is making changes, writes are the same as in any ordinary Databricks workflow. The difficulty becomes Snowflake's ability to reflect those changes.
```

## The biggest finding: As scale increases, refresh latency does too {#the-biggest-finding}

> CLDs promise fast syncing. We found this is relatively true at small and medium scales, but at large scale, we observed that changes in Databricks to synchronize with the external Iceberg tables in Snowflake lagged dramatically, sometimes 2x longer than expected. When we dialed things up to 500k tables, the refresh on Snowflake for a trivial Databricks `INSERT` could take close to two days to propagate. Some tables seemed to get “stuck” until we learned how to manually nudge refresh forward (including hacking refresh-related settings to jog the system — we hear the fine folks at Snowflake have ergonomic improvements on the way).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CLDs promise fast syncing. We found this is relatively true at small and medium scales. However, at larger scales, we observed that changes made by Databricks could take far longer than advertised on the tin to synchronize. Generally, we experienced auto-refresh waits 2x longer than expected. When we dialed things up to 500k tables, the refresh on Snowflake for a trivial Databricks `INSERT` could take two days to propagate. Some tables seemed to get “stuck.” Now, we eventually learned how to manually force refreshes for individual objects (i.e. hacking refresh-related settings to jog the system). But, we found it difficult to predict when data updates would propagate from Databricks back to Snowflake (the good news is that we hear the fine folks at Snowflake have ergonomic improvements on the way). We mostly operated on a gut feeling of when data would arrive.
```

> Ultimately, the question of whether and how you should adopt Snowflake CLDs comes down to scale and latency:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mulling over our experiences, we believe the question of whether and how you should adopt Snowflake CLDs comes down to scale and latency:
```

1. How many Iceberg tables are you syncing across multiple engines?

> 2. Do your workflows require that Snowflake has a near-real-time view of externally managed Iceberg? Or can you treat it as a view that might be stale, accept eventual consistency, and live without clear guarantees unless you build your own monitoring and manual playbook?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Do your workflows require that Snowflake has a near-real-time view of externally managed Iceberg? Or can you treat it as a view that might be stale, accept eventual consistency, and live without clear guarantees unless you build your own manual playbook and monitoring framework?
```

## Interoperability friction: Why it’s not just the metadata {#interoperability-friction}

Two non-performance issues showed up quickly:

- Naming, quoting, and casing differences become friction points when dbt is generating objects that need to be understood identically by two engines. Our deep dive has given us ideas for dbt to abstract over these ergonomic challenges. In the future, users shouldn’t need to memorize the casing/quoting rules of every catalog/engine combo. For now, unfortunately, that’s just the cost of doing platform-agnostic business.

> - Metadata and refresh behavior become part of your job. You’re managing tables and the system that decides when tables “exist.” And those show iceberg tables queries are slow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Metadata and refresh behavior become part of your job. You’re managing tables and the system that decides when tables “exist.” And those `show iceberg tables` queries are slow.
```

## The takeaway

CLDs work—up to a point. They solve recurring problems about keeping data connected across platforms. If the number of tables or update volume is very large (on the order of tens of thousands), the pattern stops being a useful abstraction. The same goes if you depend on per-second precision for synchronizing writes. But until you approach that edge, CLDs really do make it possible to treat external Iceberg catalogs like any other database.

> For us, that can unlock some very exciting capabilities within customers’ dbt workflows—cross-platform mesh, external sources, and maybe even running the same dbt project / DAG against multiple warehouses. We believe that Iceberg integrations will continue to improve, becoming more performant and easier to use. We need only look to the past year of features (like CLDs!) to be excited for what’s coming in the next.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For us, that can unlock some very exciting capabilities within customers’ dbt workflows—cross-platform mesh, external sources, and maybe even running the same dbt project / DAG against multiple warehouses. We believe that Iceberg integrations will continue to improve, becoming more performant and easier to use. We need only look to the past year of features (including Snowflake CLDs and Databricks' native managed Iceberg tables, the two features that made this story possible) to be excited for what’s coming in the next one.
```

> We’d be remiss to end without thanks to the Unity Catalog team for their half of the story.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And finally, we can’t close without giving a nod to the Unity Catalog team for partnering with Snowflake on this killer feature.
```

someone else review for tone, but I figured it's a bit stale as it is currently

Reviewer 2: I think:
- let's add Databricks appreciation in the last sentence of the previous paragraph
- let's close out with a community call-to-action

```suggestion
We want to know what you think!
- Check out the just-published GitHub discussion proposing a new spec for Iceberg `catalogs` in dbt [link TK]
- [Join the dbt community](https://www.getdbt.com/community/join-the-community) (and the #tools-iceberg channel specifically) to talk open table formats with other superusers and early adopters
```

- Metadata and refresh behavior become part of your job. You’re managing tables and the system that decides when tables “exist.” And those `show iceberg tables` queries are slow.

## The takeaway

CLDs work—up to a point. They solve recurring problems about keeping data connected across platforms. If the number of tables or update volume is very large (on the order of tens of thousands), the pattern stops being a useful abstraction. The same goes if you depend on per-second precision for synchronizing writes. But until you approach that edge, CLDs really do make it possible to treat external Iceberg catalogs like any other database.

For us, that can unlock some very exciting capabilities within customers’ dbt workflows—cross-platform mesh, external sources, and maybe even running the same dbt project / DAG against multiple warehouses. We believe that Iceberg integrations will continue to improve, becoming more performant and easier to use. We need only look to the past year of features (including Snowflake CLDs and Databricks' native managed Iceberg tables, the two features that made this story possible) to be excited for what’s coming in the next one.

> And finally, we can’t close without giving a nod to the Unity Catalog team for partnering with Snowflake on this killer feature.

Reviewer 2: Suggest ending with CTA for readers / community members
```suggestion
We want to know what you think!
- Check out the just-published GitHub discussion proposing a new spec for Iceberg `catalogs` in dbt
- [Join the dbt community](https://www.getdbt.com/community/join-the-community) (and the #tools-iceberg channel specifically) to talk open table formats with other superusers and early adopters
```
